docs(kraft): adds a procedure for zookeeper to kraft migration (#9633)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/deploying/proc-deploy-migrate-kraft.adoc

= Migrating to KRaft mode

[role="_abstract"]
If you are using ZooKeeper for metadata management in your Kafka cluster, you can migrate to using Kafka in KRaft mode. 
KRaft mode replaces ZooKeeper for distributed coordination, offering enhanced reliability, scalability, and throughput.

During the migration, you install a quorum of controller nodes as a node pool, which replaces ZooKeeper for management of your cluster. 
You enable KRaft migration in the cluster configuration by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation.  
After the migration is complete, you switch the brokers to using KRaft and the controllers out of migration mode using the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation.

Before starting the migration, verify that your environment can support Kafka in KRaft mode, as there are a number of xref:ref-operator-use-kraft-feature-gate-str[limitations].
Note also, the following:

* Migration is only supported on dedicated controller nodes, not on nodes with dual roles as brokers and controllers.
* Throughout the migration process, ZooKeeper and Controller nodes operate in parallel for a period, requiring sufficient compute resources in the cluster.

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer: Should we also list here that the ZooKeeper based cluster:
* Should use Unidirectional Topic Operator or have Topic Operator disabled
* Should not use JBOd storage as JBOD storage is currently not supported in KRaft

Reviewer 2: > Should not use JBOd storage as JBOD storage is currently not supported in KRaft

Or maybe clear about having just one volume if the `jbod` type is used in the `spec.storage.type` configuration.

        cpu: "8"
      limits:
        memory: 64Gi
        cpu: "12"    
----
+
NOTE: For the migration, you cannot use a node pool of nodes that share the broker and controller roles.

. Apply the new `KafkaNodePool` resource to create the controllers.
+
Errors related to using controllers in a ZooKeeper-based environment are expected.

. Enable KRaft migration in the `Kafka` resource by setting the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `migration`:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: migration
----
+
.Enabling KRaft migration
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: migration 
# ...
----
+
Applying the annotation to the `Kafka` resource configuration starts the migration.

. Check the controllers have started and the brokers have rolled:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get pods -n my-project
----
+
.Output shows nodes in broker and controller node pools
[source,shell]
----
NAME                     READY  STATUS   RESTARTS
my-cluster-broker-0      1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-broker-1      1/1    Running  0

> my-cluster-broker-2      1/1    Running  0

Reviewer: calling these `my-cluster-kafka` would be better as that is the state where you normally get after migrating to NodePools. So this is what most users will have.

Author: I thought about that, but I wondered if the name might be confusing and less easy to distinguish broker from controller. I've changed as you confirmed my initial thoughts.  I thought an additional line might help:

_Here, the brokers have the name `my-cluster-kafka` as they were contained in a node pool named `kafka` when migrating the cluster to use node pools._

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// deploying/deploying.adoc

[id='proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-{context}']
= Migrating to KRaft mode

[role="_abstract"]

> If you are using ZooKeeper for cluster management of your Kafka cluster, you can migrate to using Kafka in KRaft mode. 

Reviewer: I think maybe this is better? Cluster management that is what Strimzi does 😉.

```suggestion
If you are using ZooKeeper for metadata management in your Kafka cluster, you can migrate to using Kafka in KRaft mode. 
```

KRaft mode replaces ZooKeeper for distributed coordination, offering enhanced reliability, scalability, and throughput.

During the migration, you install a quorum of controller nodes as a node pool, which replaces ZooKeeper for management of your cluster. 
You enable KRaft migration in the cluster configuration by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation.  
After the migration is complete, you switch the brokers to using KRaft and the controllers out of migration mode using the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation.

> Before starting the migration, verify that your environment can support Kafka in KRaft mode, as there are a number of xref:ref-operator-use-kraft-feature-gate-str[limitations].

Reviewer: Might be worth noting that:
* Migration can be done only to dedicated controller nodes and not to mixed nodes
* During the migration, users need to run for some time the ZooKeeper and Controller nodes in parallel and should plan to have sufficient compute resources available in their cluster.

> WARNING: ZooKeeper to KRaft migration is not suitable for production environments.

Reviewer: Is this the case? What is the reason?

If nothing else, we should make clear it is not **yet** suitable.

```suggestion
WARNING: ZooKeeper to KRaft migration is not yet suitable for production environments.
```

Author: @ppatierno -- do we need this?  (We have the same note in rhel doc)

Author: we have a few notes in the guide along this line:  "IMPORTANT
KRaft mode is not ready for production in Apache Kafka or in Strimzi."

Reviewer: I think it is ready in Apache Kafka (whether it should be or not, that is a different story). If we don't think it is ready yet in Strimzi, we should make clear it will be. But we also need to understand what is missing and when it will be ready and I think this is currently not clear.

Reviewer 2: From a Strimzi perspective, I consider the migration procedure ready (even for production) but of course the codebase has to be reviewed and approved. From an Apache Kafka perspective, it's defined this way as well but as Jakub says, if it's real or not it's a different story.

.Prerequisites

> * You must be using Strimzi 0.40 (with Kafka 3.7) or newer. If you using an earlier version of AMQ Streams, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.6.1 or newer. If you using an earlier version of Strimzi or Apache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.
```

* The Cluster Operator that manages the Kafka cluster is running.
* The Kafka cluster deployment uses Kafka node pools.
+
You can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate your existing Kafka cluster to use node pools]. 
+
In the `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration, brokers must be contained in a node pool assigned a `broker` role and with the name `kafka`.
Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.

> NOTE: Currently, replica and storage configuration properties in the `KafkaNodePool` resource must also be present in the `Kafka` resource. The configuration in the `Kafka` resource is ignored when node pools are used. 

Reviewer: Not the case anymore. Should be deleted.

my-cluster-broker-2      1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-3  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-4  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-5  1/1    Running  0
# ...
----

. Check the status of the migration:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE   WARNINGS
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
----
+
`METADATA STATE` shows the mechanism used to manage Kafka metadata and coordinate operations.
At the start of the migration this is `ZooKeeper`.
+
--
* `ZooKeeper` is the initial state when metadata is only stored in ZooKeeper.
* `KRaftMigration` is the state when the migration is in progress.
* `KRaftDualWriting` is the state when the migration has ended and the cluster is working as a KRaft cluster. 
Metadata is managed in Kafka but also replicated in ZooKeeper, so you can xref:proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}[roll back from this point].
--
+
The migration status is also represented in the `status.KafkaMetadataState` property of the `Kafka` resource. 

> . Enable KRaft in the `Kafka` resource configuration by setting the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `enabled`:

Reviewer: Please add a clear warning that there is no rollback from here aynmore.

metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: enabled 
# ...
----

. Check the status of the move to full KRaft mode:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE        WARNINGS
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
my-cluster  ...  KRaftPostMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaft                 True
----
+
`KRaftPostMigration` is the state (after the brokers have rolled) when KRaft mode is enabled and there is no ZooKeeper involvement, though ZooKeeper pods are still running.
`KRaft` is the final state (after the controllers have rolled) when the KRaft migration has finalized.
+
The warning (`True`) relates to ZooKeeper configuration being present in the `Kafka` resource configuration.
+
. Clean up the deployment to remove Zookeeper configuration and resources.

.. Remove `inter.broker.protocol.version`, `log.message.format.version`, and all `spec.zookeeper` configuration properties from the `Kafka` resource.
.. Apply the changes to the `Kafka` resource configuration.

> .. Delete any resources related to the ZooKeeper deployment:

Reviewer: Isn't this done automatically?

Author: I think Paolo was working towards that. Maybe we're there.

Reviewer 2: Yes we are there now. All the ZooKeeper resources are automatically deleted now.

Author: Great. I've dropped this step

+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl delete <resource_type> <resource_name> -n my-project
----
+
For a list of resources created for ZooKeeper, see xref:ref-list-of-kafka-cluster-resources-str[].

[id='proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}']
.Performing a rollback on the migration

> Before the migration is finalized, you can perform a rollback operation as follows:

Reviewer: Needs to be more clear what _finalized_ means here.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// deploying/deploying.adoc

[id='proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-{context}']
= Migrating to KRaft mode

[role="_abstract"]
If you are using ZooKeeper for metadata management in your Kafka cluster, you can migrate to using Kafka in KRaft mode. 
KRaft mode replaces ZooKeeper for distributed coordination, offering enhanced reliability, scalability, and throughput.

During the migration, you install a quorum of controller nodes as a node pool, which replaces ZooKeeper for management of your cluster. 
You enable KRaft migration in the cluster configuration by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation.  
After the migration is complete, you switch the brokers to using KRaft and the controllers out of migration mode using the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation.

Before starting the migration, verify that your environment can support Kafka in KRaft mode, as there are a number of xref:ref-operator-use-kraft-feature-gate-str[limitations].
Note also, the following:

* Migration is only supported on dedicated controller nodes, not on nodes with dual roles as brokers and controllers.

> * Throughout the migration process, ZooKeeper and Controller nodes operate in parallel for a period, requiring sufficient compute resources in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: why are you using capital "C" for controller here? It was not for other places. I guess just a typo?

.Prerequisites

> * You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.7.0 or newer. If you using an earlier version of Strimzi or Apache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.7.0 or newer. If you are using an earlier version of Strimzi or Apache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.
```

* Verify that the ZooKeeper-based deployment is operating without the following, as they are not supported in KRaft mode:
** The Topic Operator running in bidirectional mode. It should either be in unidirectional mode or disabled.
** JBOD storage. While the `jbod` storage type can be used, the JBOD array must contain only one disk.
* The Cluster Operator that manages the Kafka cluster is running.
* The Kafka cluster deployment uses Kafka node pools.
+
If your ZooKeeper-based cluster is already using node pools, it is ready to migrate.
If not, you can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate the cluster to use node pools]. 

> To migrate, brokers must be contained in a `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration that is assigned a `broker` role and has the name `kafka`.

Reviewer 2: Why? The `kafka` name is true if you are migrating from NO node pools to node pools first (by following the link we provide on the previous line) but if your cluster was created with node pools since the beginning, the broker pools could be also named "foo", "bar", whatever.

Author: I've added the bold to make it clear:

> If your ZooKeeper-based cluster is already using node pools, it is ready to migrate.
> If not, you can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate the cluster to use node pools]. 
> To migrate **when the cluster is not using node pools**, brokers must be contained in a `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration that is assigned a `broker` role and has the name `kafka`.
> Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.

Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.

> In this procedure, the Kafka cluster name is `my-cluster`, which is located in `my-project`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this procedure, the Kafka cluster name is `my-cluster`, which is located in `my-project` namespace. 
```

The name of the controller node pool is `controller`.

.Procedure

. For the Kafka cluster, create a node pool with a `controller` role.
+

> Add a quorum of controller nodes to the node pool.

Reviewer 2: I don't get this sentence. I mean you are adding controller nodes via/using the node pool. What do you mean by "adding TO the node pool"?

Author: I've switched ita round. Hopefully, clearer now.

> The node pool adds a quorum of controller nodes to the cluster.

+
.Example configuration for a controller node pool
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaNodePoolApiVersion}
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: controller
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  roles:
    - controller
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 20Gi
        deleteClaim: false
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64Gi
        cpu: "8"
      limits:
        memory: 64Gi
        cpu: "12"    
----
+
NOTE: For the migration, you cannot use a node pool of nodes that share the broker and controller roles.

. Apply the new `KafkaNodePool` resource to create the controllers.
+
Errors related to using controllers in a ZooKeeper-based environment are expected.

. Enable KRaft migration in the `Kafka` resource by setting the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `migration`:
+
[source,shell]
----

> kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: migration

Reviewer 3: Is this really correct? Shouldn't be this:
```suggestion
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft=migration
```

Author: Either okay?  We use `:` throughout the docs for these annotate commands

Reviewer 4: With `:` the command fails. I would also add quotation marks, as annotation values must be strings.

```sh
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft="migration"
```

Reviewer 2: I have never tried wit `:` and @fvaleri is right, the command doesn't work on my side either.
Only thing the quotes are not needed around the annotation value but anyway the command works with them as well.

Author: Thanks. Actually, we only used `:` in a  couple of places (which I must have referenced). I've gone through the annotations and made consistent. @see-quick -- if you could please check commit 
[docs(review): annotations values update](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/9633/commits/1f44abcd630c1eff0b2e2632410317255243f3e5)

Author: Update: changes outside this migration will be in another PR

----
+
.Enabling KRaft migration
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: migration 
# ...
----
+
Applying the annotation to the `Kafka` resource configuration starts the migration.

. Check the controllers have started and the brokers have rolled:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get pods -n my-project
----
+
.Output shows nodes in broker and controller node pools
[source,shell]
----
NAME                     READY  STATUS   RESTARTS
my-cluster-kafka-0       1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-kafka-1       1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-kafka-2       1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-3  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-4  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-5  1/1    Running  0
# ...
----
+

> Here, the brokers have the name `my-cluster-kafka` as they were contained in a node pool named `kafka` when migrating the cluster to use node pools.

Reviewer 2: "when migrating the cluster to use node pools" ... well "if migrating ... " 
See my comment above, it's not always true. People could have cluster using node pools for brokers since the beginning and they didn't have the need to migrate (so the pool had a name different from `kafka`).

Author: It's not always true and I think we're clear on that early on. But, as Jakub pointed out, we're using the migration from no node pools as that would likely be the starting point. I don't think we need to repeat what we said earlier here.

Reviewer 2: Tbh I am not sure on which basis we can say users will start from no node pools. Do we have any evidence of that. Can't we have users having ZooKeeper with node pools already? I think so. My opinion is having the documentation not biased on that assumption but the other way around and adding that "if you are not using node pools already, please migrate to use them first".

. Check the status of the migration:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
my-cluster  ...  KRaftPostMigration
----
+
`METADATA STATE` shows the mechanism used to manage Kafka metadata and coordinate operations.
At the start of the migration this is `ZooKeeper`.
+
--
* `ZooKeeper` is the initial state when metadata is only stored in ZooKeeper.
* `KRaftMigration` is the state when the migration is in progress and brokers are rolled to register with the controllers.
The migration can take some time at this point depending on the number of topics and partitions in the cluster. 
* `KRaftDualWriting` is the state when the Kafka cluster is working as a KRaft cluster, 
but controllers are managing metadata in Kafka and ZooKeeper. 

> Brokers are rolled a second time to remove the ZooKeeper configuration and migration annotation from the `Kafka` resource.

Reviewer 2: `and migration annotation from the `Kafka` resource.` we are not removing stuff from the Kafka resource.
Maybe you meant the ZooKeeper migration flag from the broker configuration.

Reviewer 2: It's not an annotation. It's a configuration applied/removed by the operator on the broker when you migrate/end migration. You are mentioning ZooKeepeer connection here, it's not an annotation as well. The ZooKeeper migration flag comes along with such connection info.

Author: I guess it's this `zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable`, but maybe we don't need to mention that. Is it added at `KRaftMigration`?  And in which state is the ZooKeeper configuration and related resources removed?

Reviewer 2: Yes that flag exactly. It's added when moving to KRftMigration and removed when moving out of KRaftDualWriting. Anyway I am not saying we should mention it but here we have a wrong sentence about "remove the annotation on the Kafka custom resource" which is wrong. We are not removing any annotation.

Author: Thanks. I've mentioned when the flag is added and when its removed. I think it's useful.

* `KRaftPostMigration` is the state when KRaft mode is enabled for brokers and there is no ZooKeeper involvement. 

> Controllers are still connected to ZooKeeper.

Reviewer 2: and they are still doing "dual write", it's worth saying that.

You can xref:proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}[roll back from this point].
--
+
The migration status is also represented in the `status.kafkaMetadataState` property of the `Kafka` resource. 

. Enable KRaft in the `Kafka` resource configuration by setting the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `enabled`:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: enabled
----
+
.Enabling KRaft migration
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: enabled 
# ...
----
+
WARNING: Rollback cannot be performed after enabling KRaft.

. Check the status of the move to full KRaft mode:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
my-cluster  ...  KRaftPostMigration

> my-cluster  ...  KRaft             

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
my-cluster  ...  PreKRaft             
my-cluster  ...  KRaft             
```

I added the new PreKRaft state which is there since the ZooKeeper deletion was implemented.

----
+
--
* `KRaft` is the final state (after the controllers have rolled) when the KRaft migration is finalized.
--
+
All ZooKeeper-related resources have been automatically deleted.

[id='proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}']
.Performing a rollback on the migration

Before the migration is finalized by enabling KRaft in the `Kafka` resource,  and the state has moved to the `KRaft` state, you can perform a rollback operation as follows:

> . Apply the `strimzi.io/kraft: rollback` annotation to the `Kafka` resource to roll back the brokers.

Reviewer 2: I think it's important to mention you have to stay in `KRaftPostMigration` for applying this annotation value.

KRaft mode replaces ZooKeeper for distributed coordination, offering enhanced reliability, scalability, and throughput.

During the migration, you install a quorum of controller nodes as a node pool, which replaces ZooKeeper for management of your cluster. 
You enable KRaft migration in the cluster configuration by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation.  
After the migration is complete, you switch the brokers to using KRaft and the controllers out of migration mode using the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation.

Before starting the migration, verify that your environment can support Kafka in KRaft mode, as there are a number of xref:ref-operator-use-kraft-feature-gate-str[limitations].
Note also, the following:

* Migration is only supported on dedicated controller nodes, not on nodes with dual roles as brokers and controllers.
* Throughout the migration process, ZooKeeper and Controller nodes operate in parallel for a period, requiring sufficient compute resources in the cluster.

WARNING: ZooKeeper to KRaft migration is not yet suitable for production environments.

.Prerequisites

> * You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.6.1 or newer. If you using an earlier version of Strimzi or APache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.

Reviewer 2: Actually this should be 3.7.0.

> * You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.6.1 or newer. If you using an earlier version of Strimzi or APache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You must be using Strimzi 0.40 or newer with Kafka 3.6.1 or newer. If you using an earlier version of Strimzi or Apache Kafka, upgrade before migrating to KRaft mode.
```

* The Cluster Operator that manages the Kafka cluster is running.
* The Kafka cluster deployment uses Kafka node pools.
+
You can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate your existing Kafka cluster to use node pools]. 
+

> In the `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration, brokers must be contained in a node pool assigned a `broker` role and with the name `kafka`.

Reviewer 2: "and with the name `kafka`" ... from where did you get this "restriction"? We don't have that, the node pool can have the name you prefer (I have been using "broker" as name for the node pool for example, since long time).

Author: This is what we have as a requirement when creating the broker node pool: https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/in-development/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str

Reviewer 2: But it's not valid when a user has a Kafka cluster which is using ZooKeeper and was created with node pools seems the beginning.
So I think we have two situation here:
1. a user created a Kafka cluster with ZooKeeper but using node pools since beginning and they want to migrate to KRaft now --> their brokers node pool is named as they want
2. a user created a Kafka cluster with ZooKeeper without node pools. They want to migrate but they need to move to use node pools first --> what you are saying applies (following the link you provided first and then KRaft migration).

Author: I've put the paragraph together and adjusted as follows:

```
You can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate your existing Kafka cluster to use node pools]. 
To migrate, the `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration, brokers must be contained in a node pool assigned a `broker` role and with the name `kafka`.
Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.
```

Reviewer 2: I think the prerequisite here is just you have to have a Kafka cluster ZooKeeper-based using node pools.
If it's already using nodepool for brokers, you are ok, you can start to migrate to KRaft.
If not, you have to migrate to use node pools first (as the link we have) then you can start the KRaft migration.
Can we say something like this? It looks clearer to me.

Author: Sure. I've updated to be clearer about this

To migrate when the cluster is not using node pools, brokers must be contained in a `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration that is assigned a `broker` role and has the name `kafka`.
Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.

In this procedure, the Kafka cluster name is `my-cluster`, which is located in the `my-project` namespace. 
The name of the controller node pool created is `controller`.

> The node pool for the brokers is called `kafka`.

Reviewer 2: The broker node pool naming was part of along discussion. I don't love that much either but it's coming from the compromise between using a name for people who are coming from node pools migration (and the broker pool will be `kafka` for sure) and the others who already have node pools from the beginning.
I can understand that the annotate command could be confusing but I would expect that users running that command know what `kafka` means there (the CRD not the pool name).

> The node pool for the brokers is called `kafka`.

Author: Thanks @see-quick. As Paolo mentions, there was a long discussion on this. The first draft didn't use `kafka`. From Jakub's perspective, most likely case is that the user will be migrating to using node pools as well, so we went with this. I think the explanations we give make this clear.

.Procedure

. For the Kafka cluster, create a node pool with a `controller` role.
+
The node pool adds a quorum of controller nodes to the cluster.
+
.Example configuration for a controller node pool
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaNodePoolApiVersion}
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: controller
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 3
  roles:
    - controller
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 20Gi
        deleteClaim: false
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 64Gi
        cpu: "8"
      limits:
        memory: 64Gi
        cpu: "12"    
----
+
NOTE: For the migration, you cannot use a node pool of nodes that share the broker and controller roles.

. Apply the new `KafkaNodePool` resource to create the controllers.
+

> Errors related to using controllers in a ZooKeeper-based environment are expected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Errors related to using controllers in a ZooKeeper-based environment are expected in the cluster operator logs.
```

Author: Thanks. I don't think we need to mention the specific error

+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get pods -n my-project
----
+
.Output shows nodes in broker and controller node pools
[source,shell]
----
NAME                     READY  STATUS   RESTARTS
my-cluster-broker-0      1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-broker-1      1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-broker-2      1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-3  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-4  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-5  1/1    Running  0
# ...
----

. Check the status of the migration:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE   WARNINGS
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
----
+
`METADATA STATE` shows the mechanism used to manage Kafka metadata and coordinate operations.
At the start of the migration this is `ZooKeeper`.
+
--
* `ZooKeeper` is the initial state when metadata is only stored in ZooKeeper.
* `KRaftMigration` is the state when the migration is in progress.
* `KRaftDualWriting` is the state when the migration has ended and the cluster is working as a KRaft cluster. 

> Metadata is managed in Kafka but also replicated in ZooKeeper, so you can xref:proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}[roll back from this point].

Reviewer 2: Actually, along the way, we decided to not stop the migration at `KRaftDualWriting` as stable state but the next one which is the `KRaftPostMigration`.
It means that you have to expect the brokers rolling twice after the controllers are deployed.
The first time because the are configured to be connected to KRaft as well and the ZooKeeper migration flag is enabled. This way they can register to controllers and the migration starts.
Said that I would highlight that the migration can take long depending on how much topics and corresponding metadata need to be migrated. It means that watching the state could end being in the `KRaftMigration` state for long time (this is the actual state when the migration is happening). Checking that the migration is done or not is executed by the operator on reconciliation bases (so it means by default every 2 mins).
When the migration ends, the state machine moves to `KRaftDualWriting` and it triggers another roll of the brokers to remove the ZooKeeper connection and migration flag. So after rolling, the state moves to `KRaftPostMigration` waiting for the user. It's important to say that even in this state, the dual-write is happening.

Author: Thanks. I've updated as directed.

* `KRaftMigration` is the state when the migration is in progress.
The flag to enable ZooKeeper to KRaft migration (`zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable`) is added to the brokers and they are rolled to register with the controllers.
The migration can take some time at this point depending on the number of topics and partitions in the cluster. 
* `KRaftDualWriting` is the state when the Kafka cluster is working as a KRaft cluster, 
but controllers are managing metadata in Kafka and ZooKeeper. 
Brokers are rolled a second time to remove the flag to enable migration.
* `KRaftPostMigration` is the state when KRaft mode is enabled for brokers and there is no ZooKeeper involvement. 
Controllers are still managing in Kafka and ZooKeeper.
You can xref:proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}[roll back from this point].
--
+

> The migration status is also represented in the `status.kafkaMetadataState` property of the `Kafka` resource. 

Reviewer 3: Hmmm I would also here write something that from this standpoint the user could decide if he wants to:
1. go back to ZooKeeper (i.e., use `strimzi.io/kraft: rollback` mechanism) 
2. or continue with migration to KRaft

> . Enable KRaft in the `Kafka` resource configuration by setting the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to `enabled`:

Reviewer 4: It may be worth noticing that ZooKeepoer PV and PVC may not be deleted, depending on the `.spec.zookeeper.storage` configuration.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, let's mention that it will happen or not accordily with the `deleteClaim` flag (true=PVC deleted automatically, flast=PVC not deleted)

apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: enabled 
# ...
----
+
WARNING: Rollback cannot be performed after enabling KRaft.

. Check the status of the move to full KRaft mode:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE        WARNINGS
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
my-cluster  ...  KRaftPostMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaft                 True
----
+

> `KRaftPostMigration` is the state (after the brokers have rolled) when KRaft mode is enabled and there is no ZooKeeper involvement, though ZooKeeper pods are still running.

Reviewer 2: As explained before, in this state only brokers are out of ZooKeeper. Controllers are still connected to ZooKeeper and doing the dual-write. Only after applying "enabled", they will be rolled to be out of using ZooKeeper.

Reviewer 2: "though ZooKeeper pods are still running." ... they are not running anymore. I added the automation about deleting everything.

> kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: enabled

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft="enabled" --overwrite
```

> WARNING: Rollback cannot be performed after enabling KRaft.

Reviewer 4: Should we put this warning before the command to enable?

Reviewer 3: +1

`KRaft` is the final state (after the controllers have rolled) when the KRaft migration has finalized.
+
The warning (`True`) relates to ZooKeeper configuration being present in the `Kafka` resource configuration.
+
. Clean up the deployment to remove Zookeeper configuration and resources.

.. Remove `inter.broker.protocol.version`, `log.message.format.version`, and all `spec.zookeeper` configuration properties from the `Kafka` resource.
.. Apply the changes to the `Kafka` resource configuration.
.. Delete any resources related to the ZooKeeper deployment:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl delete <resource_type> <resource_name> -n my-project
----
+
For a list of resources created for ZooKeeper, see xref:ref-list-of-kafka-cluster-resources-str[].

[id='proc-deploy-migrate-kraft-rollback-{context}']
.Performing a rollback on the migration

Before the migration is finalized by enabling KRaft in the 'Kafka' resource, you can perform a rollback operation as follows:

> . Apply the `strimzi.io/kraft: rollback` annotation to the `Kafka` resource to roll back the brokers and controllers.

Reviewer 2: from `KRaftPostMigration` you are actually going to rollback brokers only (not the controllers).

+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: rollback
----
+
.Rolling back KRaft migration
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes"]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: my-project
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/kraft: rollback 
# ...
----

> . Delete the controllers node pool:

Reviewer 2: before this paragraph we should make clear that applying the "rollback" annotation is about rolling the brokers (to be connected to ZooKeeper again) and the state machine comes back to `KRaftDualWriting`.
When in this state, you can delete the controllers.

NOTE: actually from this state, the user could change their mind again and applying the "migration" flag to move again forward with migration.

> kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: rollback

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft="rollback" --overwrite
```

Reviewer 3: without `"` is also working :)

+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl delete KafkaNodePool controller -n my-project
----

. Apply the `strimzi.io/kraft: disabled` annotation to the `Kafka` resource to return the metadata state to `ZooKeeper`.
+
[source,shell]
----

> kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft: disabled

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/kraft="disabled" --overwrite
```

Reviewer 2: Yeah good catch @fvaleri , in all commands we would need the `--overwrite` because the annotation could be already present on the `Kafka` CR as `disabled` (without overwrite it's not going to work).

* Verify that the ZooKeeper-based deployment is operating without the following, as they are not supported in KRaft mode:
** The Topic Operator running in bidirectional mode. It should either be in unidirectional mode or disabled.
** JBOD storage. While the `jbod` storage type can be used, the JBOD array must contain only one disk.
* The Cluster Operator that manages the Kafka cluster is running.
* The Kafka cluster deployment uses Kafka node pools.
+
If your ZooKeeper-based cluster is already using node pools, it is ready to migrate.
If not, you can xref:proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str[migrate the cluster to use node pools]. 
To migrate when the cluster is not using node pools, brokers must be contained in a `KafkaNodePool` resource configuration that is assigned a `broker` role and has the name `kafka`.
Support for node pools is enabled in the `Kafka` resource configuration using the `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` annotation.

In this procedure, the Kafka cluster name is `my-cluster`, which is located in the `my-project` namespace. 

> The name of the controller node pool is `controller`.

Reviewer 2: I noticed you are saying it later, but maybe it's useful to mention it now as well at the beginning?

my-cluster-kafka-2       1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-3  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-4  1/1    Running  0
my-cluster-controller-5  1/1    Running  0
# ...
----

. Check the status of the migration:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get kafka my-cluster -n my-project -w
----
+
.Updates to the metadata state
[source,shell]
----
NAME        ...  METADATA STATE
my-cluster  ...  Zookeeper
my-cluster  ...  KRaftMigration
my-cluster  ...  KRaftDualWriting
my-cluster  ...  KRaftPostMigration
----
+
`METADATA STATE` shows the mechanism used to manage Kafka metadata and coordinate operations.
At the start of the migration this is `ZooKeeper`.
+
--
* `ZooKeeper` is the initial state when metadata is only stored in ZooKeeper.
* `KRaftMigration` is the state when the migration is in progress.
The flag to enable ZooKeeper to KRaft migration (`zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable`) is added to the brokers and they are rolled to register with the controllers.
The migration can take some time at this point depending on the number of topics and partitions in the cluster. 
* `KRaftDualWriting` is the state when the Kafka cluster is working as a KRaft cluster, 

> but controllers are managing metadata in Kafka and ZooKeeper. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but metadata are being stored in both Kafka and ZooKeeper. 
```

Brokers are rolled a second time to remove the flag to enable migration.

> * `KRaftPostMigration` is the state when KRaft mode is enabled for brokers and there is no ZooKeeper involvement. 

Reviewer: `and there is no ZooKeeper involvement` seems very strange when the next sentence says that it is still used.

Author: Yeah. I don't think we lose anything by dropping that.

> Controllers are still managing in Kafka and ZooKeeper.

Reviewer: Similarly to the comment above. I think `Controllers are still managing in Kafka and ZooKeeper.` makes no sense.

```suggestion
Metadata are being stored in both Kafka and ZooKeeper. 
```
